# Research meeting: 09/14

## Minutes
* Reframe Haskell-C++ interoperability away from the specific ABIs implemented by today's compilers (_i.e._, GHC and Clang) and toward a more abstract approach motivated and constrained by language semantics first and foremost.
  * This enables us to approach the research question without tackling machine-level language ABIs -- especially [GHC's memory layout](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/commentary/rts/storage/heap-objects) -- of highly optimized, real-world compilers in all their intricate detail.
    * Moreover, we may now envision language ABIs for Haskell and C++ more conducive to the languages' mutual interoperability, ideally (perhaps optimistically?) amenable to intregation into GHC and/or Clang as flags/pragmas/options for boundary code (i.e., foreign functions and foreign types).
  * We must select calculi to model programs in Haskell and C++ reasonably close to source in syntax and semantics (e.g., not baking in the implementation details made by a particular compiler for its specific ABI).
    * For Haskell, our candidate is [System FC](refs/haskell.core.pdf), the λ-calculus implemented as GHC Core _circa_ 2011 (extended thereafter for dependent types).
      * System FC is still recognizably Haskell after fairly straightforward elaboration (desugaring and inference), in contrast to the previously considered [spineless, tagless G-machine (STG)](refs/haskell.stg.pdf) from which GHC codegen emits Cmm or LLVM target code.
    * For C++, our candidate is [s++](refs/cpp.cpq.pdf), the syntactically normalized subset of C++ (without exception handling) studied in Tahina's dissertation.
  * We must also choose (or craft) a calculi to model the two languages' common target at a practicably high level (perhaps something like LLVM?).

## Follow up
1. Read the paper on [System F_𝐶](refs/haskell.core.pdf).
   1. Prepare a brief review for the next meeting.
2. Read the section of [Tahina's dissertation](refs/cpp.coq.pdf) for each variant C++ (sub-)language (_i.e._, s++, κ++, Ds++, and Vcm).
   1. Prepare a concise summary of each for next week's meeting.
3. Begin prototyping a model of Haskell-C++ interoperation in terms of plzoo-style interpreters and compilers.
