# Research meeting: 10/12

## Progress
1. Between the CompCert-derived memory models of [Vellvm](refs/vellvm.memory.pdf) and [RustBelt](refs/rustbelt.thesis.pdf), the RustBelt variant is the better choice for our purposes.
    * The Vellvm memory model is far too low level; it concretizes pointers into a linear address space (literally 32-bit integers) and keeps the same notion of memory block from CompCert, with all its hairy details (i.e., byte-sized memory cells requiring byte offsets with requisite bounds checking on every access).
    * The RustBelt memory model is *almost* exactly as high level as I originally suggested; it keeps pointers abstract like one wants for a language semantics and abstracts memory blocks even further, into a sequence of arbitrarily sized memory cells.
        + “Pointer arithmetic” in the RustBelt memory model implicitly scales each increment by the size of the memory cell (field); moreover, the semantics excludes byte-level pointer offset by an integer (i.e., `usize` in Rust or `size_t` in C/C++), only supporting field projection (from which an offset in memory cells is calculated).
        + My original proposal differs only in that it would not assume any ordering among the fields; a pointer would be $Block \times Label^{\star}$ rather than $Block \times \mathbb{N}$ in RustBelt, where the $\mathbb{N}$ indicates an offset in memory cells, with all substructures (e.g., structures in structures) flattened down into the same “offset space.“
            - While semantically convenient, it’s not obvious yet that we could beneficially utilize such a more abstract notion of offset into a memory block, so we don’t risk much by just sticking with the RustBelt memory model for now. 
2. Some interesting semantic questions arose when figuring out how to embed the evaluation order of (Core) Haskell into a call-by-push-value calculus.
    * System FC (i.e., the semantics of Core Haskell) is actually a pure language (i.e., excludes unsafe effect mechanisms like `unsafePerformIO`) and is formalized with call-by-name semantics.
        + Do we want to just use call-by-name semantics?
    * An embedding of call-by-need into call-by-push-value is available in the [literature](refs/cbpv.lazy.pdf), but Haskell is not *really* call-by-need, since GHC may evaluate the same thunk multiple times.
        + We could extend that embedding to include nondeterministic re-evaluation of the thunk, even when the computed value is available.
        + However, GHC *does* impose a semantic contract that uses of `unsafePerformIO` be pure to maintain the call-by-name semantics, at least observationally.
3. I have just started figuring out the mapping from κ++ into the call-by-push-value calculus.

## Minutes
* We will stick to the semantics of Core Haskell, i.e., with a call-by-name evaluation order.
    + In constraining our study of interoperability only by the *specified* language semantics, we enable ourselves to explore the design space of alternative *implementations* for said semantics, in particular the ABI.
        - One can imagine integrating such a new ABI as a compiler flag for GHC or –- more tantalizingly –- as an FFI mode like `foreign import cppcall symbol :: type`.
* In my emails and notes, focus Amal’s attention to areas of indecision in order to avoid getting blocked.
    + Remember that Amal is away for the next two meetings.

## Follow up
1. Talk to Andrew about…
    1. whether the C/C++ ABI guarantees the order of fields in structure layout
    2. the Swift ABI
    3. how to maybe abstract memory enough to explore a design space of ABIs
    4. reopen the memory model discussion with Amal and Theo if that seems beneficial
2. Formalize a translation from κ++ into the call-by-push-value calculus.
    * Split up the compilation into passes
3. Assemble a concrete example of the intended interoperability between κ++ and Core Haskell.
4. Typeset the call-by-push-value calculus into $\LaTeX$.
5. Summarize the proof obligations for the [realizability semantics of interoperability](refs/interop.sound.pdf) (cf., [Daniel's dissertation](refs/interop.realiz.pdf)).
    * I should do this for next week’s meeting with Theo.
6. Summarize the [call-by-push-value model of the LLVM machine model](refs/cbpv.ssa.pdf) (cf., [the later ArXiv paper](refs/cbpv.cfg.pdf)).
    * I should do this for next week’s meeting with Theo.
