# Research meeting: 01/24

## Minutes
* What is the overall project concept?
  * Shared-memory interoperability of C++ data structures via semantically compatible Haskell presentation (e.g., algebraic data types instead of uninterpreted pointers)
      * _Motivating application_: Build program analyzers (or other tools) in Haskell reusing language frontend from industrial compiler framework, specifically LLVM. Merely preprocessing and parsing a C++ source file is hellishly complicated; few such frontends exist at all: GCC, Clang, and EDG (developed by consulting firm of C++ insiders and licensed to Intel, Microsoft, NVIDIA, _&c._). Systematic derivation of a somewhat ergonomic Haskell interface (_i.e._, types) to the in-memory AST data structure built by Clang - even without access to any helper/utility methods or procedures - would have massive value.
  * Accept and expect restrictive properties for semantic type soundness, _e.g._,
      * Frozen (immutable) data structure
      * C++ respect for Haskell memory/heap policies (aliasing, lifetime, immutability)
      * Undefined behavior is not our problem
      * Ignore concurrency for now
      * Ignore architectural memory model (e.g., weak consistency) for now
  * Interpret a C++ class hierarchy (really, symbolic heap fragment) as a layout of some Haskell algebraic data types
    * Leverage Haskell type extensions (_e.g._, strictness, linearity, levity polymorphism) to expose representation safely
    * Generalize the “layout descriptions” of Dargent for our “interoperability types” (intertypes? datatype bridges?): [Dargent: A Silver Bullet for Verified Data Layout Refinement](refs/dargent.pdf)
    * Analyze language interoperability as realizability in some high-level (call-by-push-value?) machine model: [Semantic Soundness for Language Interoperability](refs/ffi.pdf)

* What is the first project milestone (i.e., first paper)?
    * Semantic interoperability of data structure between representative calculi without interleaving control flow
    * C++ execution just builds data structure in memory before returning control to Haskell permanently

## Follow up
1.	We need a calculus for Haskell semantics.
    * What do Weirich et al. typically use?
        * Core Haskell is essentially System F with extensions: [System FC with Explicit Kind Equality](refs/sysf.pdf)
        * We will ultimately want the formulation with levity polymorphism, which facilitates alternative data representation in a principled manner: [Levity Polymorphism](refs/levity.pdf) and [Kinds Are Calling Conventions](refs/kindcc.pdf)
        * The calculus formalized (and mechanized in Coq) for the ST purity proof may suffice as a starting point: [Purity of an ST Monad: Full Abstraction by Semantically Typed Back-Translation](refs/st_purity.pdf)
2.	We need a calculus for C++ semantics.
    * We do not need complete coverage of the ISO standard; for example, the semantics of exceptions are interesting but not essential for this research project.
    * What are our options from the literature?
        * HOL formalization: [A Formal Semantics for C++](refs/cpp.hol.pdf)
        * K formalization [An Executable Formal Semantics of C++](refs/cpp.k.pdf)
        * Coq formalization (extending CompCert): [Mechanized Formal Semantics and Verified Compilation for C++ Objects](refs/cpp.coq.pdf)
            * Background: Coq formalization of C semantics: [The C standard formalized in Coq](refs/stdc.pdf])
3.	We need concrete examples to illustrate the hypothetical interoperation between Haskell and C++.

_Example A_: empty base class, one layer of class inheritance
```cpp
// C++
class Expr { }

class PlusExpr : Expr {
public:
    Expr *_lhs;
    Expr *_rhs;
}

class CallExpr : Expr {
public:
    Expr *_fun;
    Expr *_arg;
}

class NumeralExpr : Expr {
public:
    int _lit;
}
```

```haskell
-- Haskell
data Expr
    = PlusExpr { lhs :: Expr, rhs :: Expr }
    | CallExpr { fun :: Expr, arg :: Expr }
    | NumeralExpr { lit :: Int }
```

_Example B_: non-empty base class, one layer of class inheritance
```cpp
// C++
class Expr {
public:
    unsigned _src_pos;
    unsigned _src_len;
}

class PlusExpr : Expr {
public:
    Expr *_lhs;
    Expr *_rhs;
}

class CallExpr : Expr {
public:
    Expr *_fun;
    Expr *_arg;
}

class NumeralExpr : Expr {
public:
    int _lit;
}
```

```haskell
-- Haskell
data Expr
    = Expr { srcPos :: Int, srcLen :: Int, variant :: ExprVariant }

data ExprVariant
    = PlusExpr { lhs :: Expr, rhs :: Expr }
    | CallExpr { fun :: Expr, arg :: Expr }
    | NumeralExpr { lit :: Int }
```

_Example C_: non-empty base class, two layers of class inheritance
```cpp
// C++
class Expr {
public:
    unsigned _src_pos;
    unsigned _src_len;
}

class InfixExpr : Expr {
public:
    Expr *_lhs;
    Expr *_rhs;
}

class PlusExpr : InfixExpr { }
class MinusExpr : InfixExpr { }

class CallExpr : Expr {
public:
    Expr *_fun;
    Expr *_arg;
}

class NumeralExpr : Expr {
public:
    int _lit;
}
```

```haskell
-- Haskell
data Expr
    = Expr { srcPos :: Int, srcLen :: Int, variant :: ExprVariant }

data ExprVariant
    = InfixExpr { lhs :: Expr, rhs :: Expr, variant :: InfixVariant }
    | CallExpr { fun :: Expr, arg :: Expr }
    | NumeralExpr { lit :: Int }

data InfixVariant
    = Plus
    | Minus
```