# Research meeting: 11/02

## Agenda
1. Does the C/C++ standard mandate linear field layout?
    * Basically, yes. The C/C++ standard has evolved to support the assumption that a structure type whose fields prefix another structure type can be used to access a memory object whose “effective” (i.e., actually initialized) type is the larger such structure type. From the [notes](refs/stdc.mem.qa.pdf) of a meeting between Peter Sewell and some standard committee members, the following point of discussion was answered affirmatively, **in both theory *and* practice**:
		> *Q39. Given two different structure types sharing a prefix of members that have compatible types, can one cast a usable pointer to an object of the first to a pointer to the second, that can be used to read and write members of that prefix (with strict-aliasing disabled and without packing variation)?* 
2. Does the Swift ABI offer us any inspiration?
    * Basically, no. The Swift ABI uses data layout at the granularity of C/C++ for fixed/stable datatypes and accessor functions to facilitate the evolution of a library’s ABI in a generic manner.
3. In the translation between κ++ and CBPV, a C++ vtable *looks like* it could be viewed as a typeclass dictionary from the Haskell side; is this a red herring? The limitations of this lens may become more obvious as I develop the Haskell Core translation into CBPV.
    * The call-by-value/call-by-name distinction does present a wrinkle, however…
    * Given the semantic purity of Haskell, the evaluation order shouldn’t matter (assuming termination…), so would it make sense to somehow abstract over evaluation order?
1. While there is little ABI flexibility on the C++ side, there is a *ton* of flexibility on the Haskell side.
    * GHC exposes some of this flexibility in data layout (and even evaluation order) in the form of various knobs (e.g., strictness, representation/levity polymorphism).
	    * I don’t think that we need to expand our Haskell calculus (System FC) to include all that detail, but I think that it makes sense to parametrize its translation into CBPV to allow exploration of that ABI range.
    * While it’s not everything we need, a recent [ICFP paper](refs/ribbit.pdf) (entitled “Bit-Stealing Made Legal: Compilation for Custom Memory Representations of Algebraic Data Types“) offers a good starting point to think about the ABI range of memory layout for algebraic datatypes.

## Minutes
* Postpone exploration of alternate data layouts for Haskell algebraic datatypes until completing the study of Haskell “as it exists today.”
* In support of that aim, we should be honest about real-world Haskell machine semantics and model call-by-need evaluation order.
	* This sets us up to model `unsafePerformIO` in order to prove the benignness of the effects in service of foreign function interaction.

## Follow up
1. Typeset the call-by-push-value calculus and κ++ translation into $\LaTeX$.
	* I would also like to code up an executable model.
2. Extend System FC with call-by-need evaluation order and embed it into the call-by-push-value calculus.
	* This will probably fall through to next week.
